# Homework 2 - Extent-based Page Table (100 pts + Extra Credit)
### Due: November 8th, 2021, 11:55pm

In the second homework, inspired by new virtual memory design, we
will build an software-based  page table that supports multiple page size
granulariy. Remember that larger page sizes reduce the number of TLB misses and the pagetable size.
The homework will have two parts (and an optional third extra-credit part).

 PART 1 (65 pts)
---------

Remember the Linux OS page fault handler code which you modified for HW 1.  In
the Linux page fault function, you will create a new structure called *Extent*
that groups a set of *physically* contiguous pages into a common structure. An
*extent* represents some range of contiguous address.  So, your extent
structure could contain a linked list (or radix tree or Xarrays) of physically
contiguous pages, the number of pages in the list, starting physical address
and the ending address, and an extent ID (an incrementing number).  First, to
create an extent structure, you must allocate the extent in the kernel (using
kmalloc()). Each element of the linked list (in the extent structure) has a
physical address of a page and the next pointer. To learn about kernel linked
list in the Linux kernel, use the below reference. 

[Kernel Linked List](https://kernelnewbies.org/FAQ/LinkedLists)

Next, each process can have several extents (regions of physcially contiguous
regions). To maintain all these extents (and easily lookup), you will add each 
extent into a a software page table. We will maintain the 
page table as a red-black tree indexed by the starting physical address 
of the extent.

Each time there is a page-fault, a page gets created. You will get the physical
address of the page, find the corresponding extent in the red-black tree (if one
exists or create a new extent), add the page to a linked list of the extent,
increment and update the necessary extent fields and continue.

See the following link to learn about Linux red-black tree.
[Kernel Red-black tree](https://lwn.net/Articles/184495/)


#### Required output:
Before the process exits, you will print the number of extents for a user-level
process. Use your homework 1's page-fault benchmark that you developed for
calculating the number of extents. Verify your implementation with any other 
application that you have used in the past. To evaluate the correctness of your
approach, I will be using a custom benchmark to measure the number of extents.

Your code must also be thread-safe. Use a multi-threaded program to check the
thread safety of your code.

 PART 2 (35 pts)
---------

#### Required output:
(a) In part 2 of the homework, first, you will measure the additional software
overhead for maintaining the page table and extent.
You will use the page fault benchmark (homework 1) to 
compare your extent implementation against page fault handler without extent.

#### Required output:
(b) Your current x86 platforms store one TLB entry for each page. If we had the
capability to store the extent address (that maps to a group of physically
contiguous pages) in the TLB instead of one 4K pages, how many TLB entries can
we save?  Provide a simple calculation by measuring the number of page faults
suffered by a process (your page-fault benchmark) and compare it with the number
of extents.

References
---------
To remind you, the page faults for anonymous memory are handled in the following function inside
[mm/memory.c](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/stable/linux.git/tree/mm/memory.c?h=linux-4.17.y)
source file.

```
int do_anonymous_page(struct vm_fault *vmf)
```
This function first checks whether the page fault is read or write fault (due to
read or write access), then (1) allocates a page, (2) creates a new page table
entry (PTE), and (3) adds the PTE to the page table.

[Reference 1](https://shanetully.com/2014/04/adding-a-syscall-to-linux-3-14/) 
[Reference 2](https://macboypro.wordpress.com/2009/05/15/adding-a-custom-system-call-to-the-linux-os/) 

PART 3 (Extra Credit 10 pts)
----------------------------
Part 1 and 2 mainly focus on anonymous pages (i.e., heap pages). But note that
a significant number of memory pages are also allocated for I/O buffer cache
pages, mapped to the page table, and cached in TLBs. 

In the third extra-credit part, you will generate the extents for the I/O cache
pages. The mechanism for I/O cache pages is the same as anonymous pages, but
you must handle faults for I/O pages (find the function similar to
do_anonymous_page() that handles faults for I/O pages.


Resources
-------------
Similar to HW 2, you will use the QEMU-based virtual machine to test the modified
OS. QEMU VMs run either on a bare-metal OS or even inside another virtual
machine. More details on QEMU can be obtained [here] (https://www.qemu.org/).

#For students new to QEMU or hacking kernel, we have created a set of
#instructions about how to compile a custom kernel (OS) and how to run the
#OS using QEMU. Detailed step-by-step instructions can be found here.

```
https://github.com/SudarsunKannan/CS519
```

Computing Resource
---------------------
If you need access to a development environment and cannot use your laptop, 
please send me an email (sudarsun.kannan@cs.rutgers.edu).


 Starting Early
-----------------
This a significant-but-essential homework for understanding the basics of OS
virtual memory. Please start working on this homework early. If you have
questions, make sure to ask them during office hours.
